In this chapter I'm going to present to
you the fundamentals or basic building
blocks of Python.
Which includes the data types,
expressions, statements, and variables.
We're gonna start off talking about
expressions and statements.
Also variables before we talk about the
data types.
Primarily because you need to see how
to write even the simplest programs in
Python.
So to be more effective in my
presentation,
we're going to work with the interactive
shell.
The interactive shell is in Python 2.7.2,
I'm going to go to
that sub-directory and then to start the
shell, I'm going to type Python.
And the interactive shell allows us to
enter Python
programs interactively, so I can enter
expressions and statements.
Without having to be in some sort of
editor
and then run the interpreter from the
command line.
I won't do this very often but for this
particular lesson, especially
on expressions, it's the most effective
way to present the information to you.
The most basic expression in Python would
be a single data item or datum.
So for example.
Typing in the number 1 is an expression
that evaluates to itself.
So, 1 is a piece of literal data.
And a piece of literal data or datum is an
expression and it evaluates to itself.
Of course, a more complicated expression
in this
case called an arithmetic expression, 1
plus 2.
We'll evaluate to whatever the result is
of applying
the arithmetic operator plus to 1 and 2
and you
can have much more complex expressions
such as 1
plus 2 times 3 divided by 2, which yields
4.
We're gonna talk more about those when we
talk about numbers.
Besides numbers, we can also have string
expressions,
so for example, hello plus world yields
hello world.
Notice that I put the strings in single
quotes.
I can also use double quotes, whatever
your preference is works fine and you can.
Concatenate, that's what we're doing here,
as
many different strings together as you
want.
Oops, a little, made a little mistake
there, I hit enter before I finished
so you see what happened, it told me that
was syntax error, invalid syntax.
We'll talk about errors more later, but
since you've seen one.
I'll just leave it in here so that you can
understand what happens.
What I was trying to do, we'll try
it one more time, was demonstrate a long
concatenation.
And I should mention that the plus sign
works for both numbers and strings.
With numbers it's the addition operator,
with strings it's the concatenation
operator.
And concatenation just simply means
combining.
Multiple strings into one string, like I
did just there.
Notice that even though I used double
quotes for my
strings, internally Python represents a
string with a single quote.
But again, it's your choice how to do
that.
Another type of expression might be a
boolean expression, where we write
something like 100.
Greater than 200 and that returns a false
value.
So that's another example of an
expression, there are others
but we'll stop with numbers, strings, and
booleans for right now.
So after expressions the next building
block would be statements.
There are lots of different types of
statements.
There are assignment statements, there are
looping
statements, there are if statements to
make decisions.
We'll start out with the simplest, or
probably the one you'll
need to learn the first, and that would be
assignment statements.
So assignment statements are used to
assign values to variables.
So for example.
Here we are assigning the value 100 to the
variable num.
So here I'm introducing both statements
and variables in one example.
You'll notice that I don't have to provide
a data type with my variable.
Python automatically assigns data types
based on
the values that are assigned to variables.
So I can turn around and write that
expression and it works just as well.
Now, num holds the string 1.
So variables in Python are very flexible.
Let's go back to our original example.
And then, just to demonstrate, a common
use of variables.
We can use variables in expressions and
the interpreter
will look up their value and then evaluate
it accordingly.
So num 2 gets the value 300, because num
has
the value 100, and num 1 has the value
200.
So now you've seen examples of the three
fundamental concepts I wanted to describe
in this lesson.
Expressions, which can be of different
types, you
can have numeric expressions, you can have
string expressions.
You can have boolean expressions and those
aren't the only types but those
are the three most common you're going to
see early in the course.
And I demonstrated how to use variables
via the
assignment statement and how they apply in
expressions themselves.
So with that we're ready to move on to the
next lesson
where we're going to delve a little deeper
into the numeric datatypes.